is the universe infinite does it have an
edge and if so what would you see if you
went there today we know that the
Universe had a beginning 14 billion
years ago and that it's been expanding
ever since but something that's
expanding should also have an edge right
well it sort of does information can't
travel faster than light that means that
we can only see parts of the universe
whose light has had time to reach us in
the last 14 billion years when we look
outwards what we see is a sphere
centered on us the observable universe
but it gets a tad more complicated
because the universe has been expanding
we know that the most far away things
whose light we can see are actually 45
billion light years from us right now so
the observable universe is a sphere with
a radius of 45 billion light years it
contains around 200 billion galaxies
each with hundreds of billions of stars
so for us there is an edge we're looking
at the past until there is just no past
left this Edge is really more like an
edge in time and in a sense meaningless
the real universe is for sure bigger
than what we can see but how much there
are two options either the universe is
ready big but finite or it's truly
infinite a finite Universe means that
that if you want to fill it with ice
cream you can do it you need a lot of
ice cream but it is a finite amount but
that leads to a weird problem such a
universe should have an edge a cosmic
wall where space ends and if there's an
edge there should be something outside
that edge but the universe by definition
is all there is so how could there be
stuff outside all there is does the idea
of something outside of everything even
make sense
except of course there is a physics hack
you can have a universe that has no
border but that still could be filled
with a finite amount of ice
cream what if the universe is truly
finite imagine an orange and a really
tiny ant the ant can only see a small
piece of the skin just as you can only
see a small chunk of the universe but if
the ant starts walking it will
eventually walk around the whole orange
and be back to its starting point
so the skin of an orange is not infinite
but it doesn't have a border the
universe is not like the skin of an
orange but it could be very similar
instead of a sphere it could be a
hypersphere where 3D space is curled on
itself which is impossible for your
brain to visualize unfortunately but the
point is no borders no outside of the
hypersphere from our human amp
perspective our whole 3D space is like
the peel of the orange if you were
aboard a spaceship flying in a straight
line you would eventually come back to
earth how does any of this make sense
the actual physics is hard so we have to
simplify and lie a bit here but in a
nutshell it all boils down to gravity
the way it works is that mass creates
Gravity by bending SpaceTime this
bending is the strongest where the mass
is but sort of stretches on forever like
a very mild tension in the fabric of
SpaceTime itself this could bend the
whole universe in a way where it bends
back on itself which then makes the
hypersphere if you find this confusing
we're with you if the universe happens
to be a hypersphere how could we find
out how big it is on Earth we can see
things disappear below the Horizon and
that helps us calculate how big the
Earth is scientists tried to find some
sort of universe Horizon that would
reveal the scale of the Cosmic Sphere
but didn't see anything which means that
if the universe is a hypersphere it
needs to be so big that from our
perspective it looks like we're living
on a flat surface
for this to make sense a hyperspherical
universe should be at least 1,000 times
bigger than our observable part it could
be a trillion times bigger for all we
know but not smaller than that some
scientists thought all of this is way
too straightforward and came up with a
Wilder option the universe could be like
the frosting of a donut a hyper donut
also impossible to visualize for your
brain this too means that if you travel
in a straight line you'd get back to
where you started but with fun
complications
in a hyper donut Universe there's not
the same amount of stuff in every
direction if two spaceships fly in
different directions one could get back
to the start way earlier this also means
that light from far away galaxies would
do fun and confusing stuff in a sort of
cosmic Hall of Mirrors effect we could
see far away things in two places but
not just that we would see it in
different moments in time because its
light would have taken much longer to
travel in One Direction than than the
other you could see a star being born in
front of you and see that same star die
on the opposite side of the sky how big
would such a hyper donut Universe be
well because of its strange geometry
actually this is kind of the smallest
possible Universe potentially just a few
times bigger than the observable
universe but it could also be way way
bigger we don't know okay so much for
finite universes but what if it's truly
infinite and space goes on forever what
would that be
like what if the universe is truly
infinite actually the cosmological model
used by most scientists describes an
infinite Universe we mostly use it to
calculate what happens inside our
observable chunk but if taken literally
it predicts an infinite Universe an
infinite Universe goes on well forever
with no border anywhere also impossible
to visualize wherever you look look
you'll find more and more stuff in every
possible Direction this kind of breaks
our brain a bit for a few reasons first
of all if the universe is infinite is it
also Eternal and has been there forever
was there a time when there was nothing
everywhere and then there was something
everywhere well we don't know but we
have a lot of evidence for the Big Bang
so it really seems like the universe
started at some point in the past but
wait since the Big Bang the universe has
been expanding how can an infinite thing
that's everywhere become even bigger
Cosmic expansion just means that the
distance between galaxies is growing
with time even an infinite space can
become bigger welcome to the paradoxes
of
infinity infinity gets much weirder
though as you travel with your spaceship
in a straight line you find new galaxies
stars and planets new wonders new weird
stuff probably new aliens and new life
forms Stranger than you could ever
imagine but after a long time you might
find the most special thing in the
universe yourself an exact copy of you
watching this video right now how can
that be well everything in existence is
made of a finite amount of different
particles and a finite number of
different particles can only be combined
in a finite number of ways that number
may be so large that it feels like
Infinity to our brains but it's not
really if you have finite options to
build things but Infinite Space that is
full of things in all directions forever
then it makes sense that by pure chance
there will likely be repetition although
just because something is possible
doesn't mean it will actually happen
maybe the Universe goes on forever but
only the boring stuff repeats itself
endlessly maybe there is really only one
you but if the laws of physics are the
same everywhere then Far Far Away gas
could have given birth to stars and
planets where primitive genetic
information could emerge from chemistry
which might have ended up in cells and
animals that have involved in really
unlikely ways and eventually Apes that
learn how to create online videos it
happened at least once so the chance is
not zero even if the chance of there
being an exact copy of you watching this
video right now is almost zero almost
zero is still a huge number in an
infinite Universe unfortunately you'll
never meet because almost zero still
means the chance is incredibly small
Earth as it exists right now is so
unlikely you'd have to travel incredibly
f to find a second identical Earth some
10 to the 10 to the 29 the one followed
by 100 ocan zeros times the size of the
observable universe so far that it kind
of means forever far away still in a
truly infinite Universe every
combination of particles could
reasonably not just occur only once but
an infinite number of
times it's time to stop now while these
scenarios are possible on paper we've
entered science philosophy here
currently none of these are ideas are
testable or provable if the universe is
infinite we will never know the reality
is for us the universe is finite and has
an edge and we can see the edge the edge
in time everything we can interact with
is within the observable universe and
most likely this will stay true
forever even if this finite Universe
feels small to you it's more than big
enough to fulfill all the dreams that we
and our descendants can ever come up
with infinitely enough for all of
us while we can't be sure whether the
universe is infinite many fascinating
questions do have definitive answers in
science maths and technology and you can
learn all about them on brilliant.org
brilliant will make you a better thinker
and Problem Solver with thousands of
Hands-On lessons on just about anything
you may be curious about they recently
launched a whole new suite of data
courses that use real data to tell
powerful stories while training your
brain to see Trends through the chaos of
truly massive data sets you'll answer
practical questions like how to maximize
Revenue hosting on Airbnb using the same
analysis techniques that scientists use
to explore the distribution of galaxies
and unravel the mysteries of the cosmos
A Foundation that can take your
understanding to astronomical Heights
we've also partnered with brilliant to
create a series of lessons to take your
scientific knowledge to the next level
these lessons let you further explore
the topics in our most popular videos
from rabis and mamalian Metabolism to
climate science and supern noi each
lesson on brilliant is interactive like
a one-on-one version of a cot gazar
video and you can get started Whenever
Wherever right from whatever device
you'd like to get handson with csar
lessons and explore everything brilliant
has to offer you can start your free
30-day trial by signing up at
brilliant.org
nutshell there's even an extra perk for
gazak viewers the first 200 people to
use the link get 20% off an annual
membership once their trial
[Music]
ends